Tools, Formats and services for efficient data management, collaboration and reproducibility in neuroscience

Michael Sonntag1, Achilleas Koutsou1, Christian Garbers1, Christian Johannes Kellner1, Jan Grewe2, Thomas Wachtler1

1. German Neuroinformatics Node, German Neuroinformatics Node, München, Germany
2. Institut für Neurobiologie, Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

Management of scientific data, including consistent organization and storage of data, is
a challenging task. Data needs to be annotated with metadata to provide information
about the underlying experiment to ensure reproducibility. Accessing and managing data
from multiple workplaces while keeping it in sync, backed up, and easily accessible from
within or outside the lab, is even more demanding. To minimize the time and effort
scientists have to spend on these tasks, we here present formats and tools designed for
comprehensive and reproducible management of scientific data. To easily store, select,
retrieve and share data using an open format we provide the NIX[1] format, which offers
convenient organization of data and metadata, supporting various data types including
electrophysiology and imaging, and enables to effectively link data and corresponding
analysis results as well as the associated metadata. NIX builds on the odML[2] metadata
format and is supported by the Neo[3] Python package for electrophysiology, enabling
Neo users to store their data in a common open format. Keeping data organized in the
lab is made easy via the GIN[4] services. GIN keeps track of changes to the contents
and organization of the files and provides secure remote access, making it convenient to
work from multiple workplaces while keeping all data available and in sync. Data can
be managed from web and file browsers or through a command line interface, enabling
even integration into data acquisition and analysis procedures. The system works with
any kind of directory structure and file types, using established technologies to keep
previous versions accessible when datasets are updated. The service furthermore makes
it straightforward to share data within a lab or with off-site collaborators and to work on
it together. Any data hosted with the service can easily be made persistently available
for publication using digital identifiers. Combining GIN and NIX allows streamlining
data workflows and eases the sharing of well-annotated datasets within the lab, among
collaborators between labs, or with the public.

Acknowledgements
Supported by BMBF (Grant 01GQ1302)

References
1 http://www.g-node.org/nix/
2 http://www.g-node.org/odml/
3 http://neuralensemble.org/
4 https://web.gin.g-node.org/

©(2017) Sonntag M, Koutsou A, Garbers C, Kellner CJ, Grewe J, Wachtler T
Cite as:
Sonntag M, Koutsou A, Garbers C, Kellner CJ, Grewe J, Wachtler T (2017) Tools, Formats and
services for efficient data management, collaboration and reproducibility in neuroscience.
Bernstein Conference 2017
Abstract. doi: 10.12751/nncn.bc2017.0137

