Using RDF to push FAIR for diverse Metadata

Michael Sonntag1, Yaroslav Shalivskyy1, Achilleas Koutsou1, Christian Garbers1, Jan Grewe2, Thomas Wachtler1

1 German Neuroinformatics Node, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Martinsried, Germany
2 Institute for Neurobiology, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

Modern day scientists are challenged with a main obstacle: huge amounts of data. The annotation of
experimental data with metadata is vital to provide context for further analysis inside the lab and
with collaborators or meta-studies. We previously presented odML[1] as an approach to data annotation,
collecting metadata in an organized, easy to use, easy to read fashion providing an intuitive format for
archiving and collaboration. Recent initiatives like the FAIR principles[2] showed the need for publication
of properly annotated data on an even larger scale.
Inspired by the odML format we present an investigative approach utilizing the common and flexible
semantic web RDF technology to effortlessly make even diverse metadata interoperable, findable and
accessible according to the FAIR principles.
Introducing a small set of general terms derived from the odML format, virtually any metadata
from different sources can be fed to a single, searchable RDF graph, effectively making diverse projects
and datasets findable. Taking advantage of the powerful OWL feature of RDF, each distinct set of metadata
can be subclassed to the benefit of maintaining the original structure without losing the common generic
structure keeping interoperability without sacrificing findability.
To provide easy access to large collections of metadata, we introduce an augmented version of the
open source SPARQL server Apache Fuseki[3]. This software provides access to the metadata by both custom,
easy to use search terms as well as the powerful SPARQL query language.

1 A bottom-up approach to data annotation in neurophysiology. 10.3389/fninf.2011.00016
2 The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. 10.1038/sdata.2016.18
3 Jena 2006, A semantic web framework for Java, http://jena.apache.org/
